# Testing _fastlane_

## Testing your local changes

### Checking it all

The `Fastfile` included at the top of the fastlane project allows you to run several validation steps, such as automated tests, code style and more.

```
bundle exec fastlane test
```

You can also run those steps independently or on a more fine-grained way.

### Automated tests

Make sure to run the automated tests using `bundle exec` to ensure you’re running the correct version of `rspec` and `rubocop`.

#### All unit tests

First, navigate into the root of the _fastlane_ project and run all unit tests using

```
bundle exec rake test_all
```

You can also invoke rspec directly

```
bundle exec rspec
```

The test execution sends all standard output to a random temporary file. Prefix the command line with `DEBUG= ` to print out the output instead. E.g. `DEBUG= bundle exec rspec`

#### Unit tests for one specific tool

If you want to run tests only for one tool, use

```
bundle exec rspec [tool_name]
```

#### Unit tests in one specific test file

If you know exactly which `_spec.rb` file you want to run, use

```
bundle exec rspec ./fastlane/spec/fastlane_require_spec.rb
```

Replace `./fastlane/spec/fastlane_require_spec.rb` with the path of your test file of course.

#### Specific unit test (group) in a specific test file

If you know the specific unit test or unit test group you want to run, use

```
bundle exec rspec ./fastlane/spec/fastlane_require_spec.rb:17
```

The number is the line number of the unit test (`it ... do`) or unit test group (`describe ... do`) you want to run.

Instead of using the line number you can also use a filter with the `it "something", now: true` notation and then use `bundle exec rspec -t now` to run this tagged test. (Note that `now` can be any random string of your choice.)

#### Ensuring all tests run independently

If you want to check if all the tests in the test suite can be run independently, use

```
bundle exec rake test_all_individually
```

#### Troubleshoot flickering tests

If your tests fail randomly, pass extra arguments to `test_all` and `test_all_individually` using the environment variable `RSPEC_ARGS` to isolate the test failures and reproduce them.

Here are some examples.

Randomize the order of tests for the full suite:
```
RSPEC_ARGS="--order rand" bundle exec rake test_all
```

Pass a given seed to the full test suite:
```
RSPEC_ARGS="--seed 1234" bundle exec rake test_all
```

Run each test file independently and randomize within each run:
```
RSPEC_ARGS="--bisect random" bundle exec rake test_all_individually
```

Run the specific tests in bisect mode with a given seed:
```
bundle exec rspec --seed 1234 bisect your/list/of/tests.rb
```

For more information, see [rspec command line documentation](https://rspec.info/features/3-13/rspec-core/command-line/)


### Code style

To verify and auto-fix the code style

```
bundle exec rubocop -a
```

If you want to run code style verification only for one tool, use `bundle exec rubocop -a [tool_name]`

### FastlaneSwiftRunner

If you'd like to see your changes reflect on `FastlaneSwiftRunner`, the Swift set of APIs, you need to update the auto-generated Swift APIs locally. You can do that by running `bundle exec fastlane generate_swift_api`. Once this is done, you can [test your local _fastlane_ code base with your setup](#test-your-local-fastlane-code-base-with-your-setup).

Do not commit the changes generated by the `generate_swift_api` command, as this is part of the release process of a new version of _fastlane_, so your PR shouldn't include those changes.

If you need to see any output from FastlaneSwiftRunner, activate the flag `--verbose` when launching `FastlaneSwiftRunner` or any of its lanes.

Remember that to debug `FastlaneSwiftRunner` on Xcode, you can set a flag to wait for the executable to be launched by _fastlane_. You can go to next path and set a tick on Scheme → `FastlaneSwiftRunner` → Run → Launch → Wait for the executable to be launched.

<!-- Make sure that this section is the same as the one in `ToolsAndDebugging.md` -->

## Test your local _fastlane_ code base with your setup

After introducing some changes to the _fastlane_ source code, you probably want to test the changes for your application. The easiest way to do so it use [bundler](https://bundler.io/).

Edit your `Gemfile` in your project's root folder and replace the `gem 'fastlane'` line with:

```
gemspec path: File.expand_path("<PATH_TO_YOUR_LOCAL_FASTLANE_CLONE>")
```

If you don't have a `Gemfile` yet, copy the `Gemfile` [.assets/Gemfile](.assets/Gemfile) from your local _fastlane_ clone and drop it into your project's root folder.

Make sure to replace `<PATH_TO_YOUR_LOCAL_FASTLANE_CLONE>` with the path to your _fastlane_ clone, e.g. `~/fastlane`, then you can run

```
bundle update
```

in your project’s root directory. After doing so, you can verify you’re using the local version by running

```
bundle info fastlane
```

which should print out the path to your local development environment.

From now on, every time you introduce a change to your local _fastlane_ code base, you can immediately test it by running `bundle exec fastlane …`. (Note that just using `fastlane …` without `bundle exec` will **not** use your local _fastlane_ code base!)

If you want to run a command with your normal _fastlane_ installation, simply do not run the command with the `bundle exec` prefix.

To completely remove _fastlane_ from your local project, delete the `Gemfile` you created earlier, or undo the changes you made to match the `Gemfile` template.
